extensions/jsonpatch/index.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: "JSON Patch Extension"
---

## Status <a href="#status" id="status" class="headerlink"></a>

**This extension is a work in progress** and will change as implementation work
progresses.

## Introduction <a href="#introduction" id="introduction" class="headerlink"></a>

The "JSON Patch extension" is an [official
extension](/extensions/#official-extensions) of the JSON API specification.
It provides support for modification of resources with the HTTP PATCH method
[[RFC5789](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5789)] and the JSON Patch format
[[RFC6902](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6902)].

For the sake of brevity, operations requested with `PATCH` and conforming
with JSON Patch will be called "Patch operations".

Servers and clients **MUST** negotiate support for and use of the JSON Patch
extension [as described in the base specification](/format/#extending) using
`jsonpatch` as the name of the extension.

## Patch Operations <a href="#patch-operations" id="patch-operations" class="headerlink"></a>

Patch operations **MUST** be sent as an array to conform with the JSON
Patch format. A server **MAY** limit the type, order, and count of
operations allowed in this top level array.

### Request URLs and Patch Paths <a href="#patch-urls" id="patch-urls" class="headerlink"></a>

The request URL and each Patch operation's `"path"` are complementary and
**MUST** combine to target a particular resource, collection, attribute, or
relationship.

If a server supports the Patch extension, it **MUST** allow Patch operations at
any resource or relationship URLs that accept POST, PATCH, or DELETE requests.

Patch operations **MAY** also be allowed at the root URL of an API. In this
case, every `"path"` within a Patch operation **MUST** include the full
resource path relative to the root URL. This allows for general "fire hose"
updates to any resource or relationship represented by an API. As stated
above, a server **MAY** limit the type, order, and count of bulk operations.

### Creating Resources <a href="#patch-creating" id="patch-creating" class="headerlink"></a>

To create a resource, request an `"add"` operation with a `"path"` that points
to the end of its corresponding resource collection (`"/-"`). The `"value"`
should contain a resource object.

For example, a new photo could be created with the following request:

```text
PATCH /photos
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/-",
    "value": {
      "type": "photos",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Ember Hamster",
        "src": "http://example.com/images/productivity.png"
      }
    }
  }
]
```

### Updating Attributes <a href="#patch-updating-attributes" id="patch-updating-attributes" class="headerlink"></a>

To update an attribute, perform a `"replace"` operation with the attribute's
name specified by the `"path"`.

For instance, the following request should update just the `src` property of the
photo at `/photos/1`:

```text
PATCH /photos/1
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  { "op": "replace", "path": "/src", "value": "http://example.com/hamster.png" }
]
```

### Updating Relationships <a href="#patch-updating-relationships" id="patch-updating-relationships" class="headerlink"></a>

To update a relationship, send an appropriate Patch operation to the
relationship's URL.

A server **MAY** also support relationship updates at a higher level, such
as the resource's URL or the API's root URL. As discussed above, the request
URL and each Patch operation's `"path"` must be complementary and combine to
target a particular relationship's URL.

#### Updating To-One Relationships <a href="#patch-updating-to-one-relationships" id="patch-updating-to-one-relationships" class="headerlink"></a>

To update a to-one relationship, perform a `"replace"` operation with a URL
and `"path"` that targets the relationship. The `"value"` **MUST** be a
resource identifier object or `null`, to remove the relationship.

For instance, the following request should update the `author` of an article:

```text
PATCH /article/1/relationships/author
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  { "op": "replace", "path": "", "value": {"type": "people", "id": "1"} }
]
```

To remove a to-one relationship, perform a `replace` operation on the
relationship to change its value to `null`. For example:

```text
PATCH /article/1/relationships/author
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  { "op": "replace", "path": "", "value": null }
]
```

#### Updating To-Many Relationships <a href="#patch-updating-to-many-relationships" id="patch-updating-to-many-relationships" class="headerlink"></a>

A server **MUST** respond to Patch operations that target a *to-many
relationship URL* as described below.

For all operations, the `"value"` **MUST** contain an object that contains
an array of resource identifier objects or an empty array, to remove all
elements of the relationship.

If a client requests a `"replace"` operation to a *to-many relationship URL*, the
server **MUST** either completely replace every member of the relationship,
return an appropriate error response if some resources can not be found or
accessed, or return a `403 Forbidden` response if complete replacement is
not allowed by the server.

For example, the following request replaces every tag for an article:

```text
PATCH /photos/1/relationships/tags
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "op": "replace",
    "path": "",
    "value": [
      { "type": "tags", "id": "2" },
      { "type": "tags", "id": "3" }
    ]
  }
]
```

To add an element to a to-many relationship, request an `"add"` operation that
targets the relationship's URL. Because the operation is targeting the end of a
collection, the `"path"` must end with `"/-"`.

In the following example, the comment with ID `123` is added to the list of
comments for the article with ID `1`:

```text
PATCH /articles/1/relationships/comments
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/-",
    "value": [
      { "type": "comments", "id": "123" }
    ]
  }
]
```

To remove a to-many relationship, perform a `"remove"` operation that targets
the relationship's URL.

In the following example, comments with IDs of `5` and `13` are removed
from the list of comments for the article with ID `1`:

```text
PATCH /articles/1/relationships/comments
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "op": "remove",
    "path": "",
    "value": [
      { "type": "comments", "id": "5" },
      { "type": "comments", "id": "13" }
    ]
  }
]
```

### Deleting a Resource <a href="#patch-deleting" id="patch-deleting" class="headerlink"></a>

To delete a resource, perform a `"remove"` operation with a URL and `"path"`
that targets the resource.

For instance, photo `1` might be deleted with the following request:

```text
PATCH /photos/1
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  { "op": "remove", "path": "" }
]
```

### Responses <a href="#patch-responses" id="patch-responses" class="headerlink"></a>

#### 204 No Content <a href="#patch-responses-204" id="patch-responses-204" class="headerlink"></a>

A server **MUST** return a `204 No Content` status code in response to a
successful Patch operation in which the client's current attributes remain up to
date.

#### 200 OK <a href="#patch-responses-200" id="patch-responses-200" class="headerlink"></a>

If a server accepts an update but also changes the resource(s) in other ways
than those specified by the request (for example, updating the `updatedAt`
attribute or a computed `sha`), it **MUST** return a `200 OK` response as well
as a representation of the updated resources.

The server **MUST** specify a `Content-Type` header of `application/vnd.api+json;
ext=jsonpatch`. The body of the response **MUST** contain an array of JSON objects,
each of which **MUST** conform to the JSON API media type
(`application/vnd.api+json`). Response objects in this array **MUST** be in
sequential order and correspond to the operations in the request document.

For instance, a request may create two photos in separate operations:

```text
PATCH /photos
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/-",
    "value": {
      "type": "photos",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Ember Hamster",
        "src": "http://example.com/images/productivity.png"
      }
    }
  },
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/-",
    "value": {
      "type": "photos",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Mustaches on a Stick",
        "src": "http://example.com/images/mustaches.png"
      }
    }
  }
]
```

The response would then include corresponding JSON API documents contained
within an array:

```text
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "data": [{
      "type": "photos",
      "id": "123",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Ember Hamster",
        "src": "http://example.com/images/productivity.png"
      }
    }]
  }, {
    "data": [{
      "type": "photos",
      "id": "124",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Mustaches on a Stick",
        "src": "http://example.com/images/mustaches.png"
      }
    }]
  }
]
```

#### Errors <a href="#patch-responses-errors" id="patch-responses-errors" class="headerlink"></a>

A server **MAY** return error objects that correspond to each operation. The
body of the response **MUST** contain an array of JSON objects, which
**MUST** be in sequential order and correspond to the operations in the
request document. Each response object **SHOULD** contain only error objects
keyed by `"errors"`, since no operations can be completed successfully when
any errors occur. Error codes for each specific operation **SHOULD** be
returned in the `"status"` member of each error object.

Commit message:

Remove extension mechanism from base spec.
Instead of rushing the extension mechanism into the 1.0 release, we are
marking it as experimental and removing it from the base spec.

This allows us to solidify the extension concepts for a future release.

extensions/jsonpatch/index.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: "JSON Patch Extension"
---

## Status <a href="#status" id="status" class="headerlink"></a>

**Extensions are an experimental feature** and should be considered a work
in progress. There is no official support for extensions in the base JSON
API specification.

## Introduction <a href="#introduction" id="introduction" class="headerlink"></a>

The "JSON Patch extension" is an [official
extension](/extensions/#official-extensions) of the JSON API specification.
It provides support for modification of resources with the HTTP PATCH method
[[RFC5789](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5789)] and the JSON Patch format
[[RFC6902](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6902)].

For the sake of brevity, operations requested with `PATCH` and conforming
with JSON Patch will be called "Patch operations".

Servers and clients **MUST** negotiate support for and use of the JSON Patch
extension [as described in the base specification](/format/#extending) using
`jsonpatch` as the name of the extension.

## Patch Operations <a href="#patch-operations" id="patch-operations" class="headerlink"></a>

Patch operations **MUST** be sent as an array to conform with the JSON
Patch format. A server **MAY** limit the type, order, and count of
operations allowed in this top level array.

### Request URLs and Patch Paths <a href="#patch-urls" id="patch-urls" class="headerlink"></a>

The request URL and each Patch operation's `"path"` are complementary and
**MUST** combine to target a particular resource, collection, attribute, or
relationship.

If a server supports the Patch extension, it **MUST** allow Patch operations at
any resource or relationship URLs that accept POST, PATCH, or DELETE requests.

Patch operations **MAY** also be allowed at the root URL of an API. In this
case, every `"path"` within a Patch operation **MUST** include the full
resource path relative to the root URL. This allows for general "fire hose"
updates to any resource or relationship represented by an API. As stated
above, a server **MAY** limit the type, order, and count of bulk operations.

### Creating Resources <a href="#patch-creating" id="patch-creating" class="headerlink"></a>

To create a resource, request an `"add"` operation with a `"path"` that points
to the end of its corresponding resource collection (`"/-"`). The `"value"`
should contain a resource object.

For example, a new photo could be created with the following request:

```text
PATCH /photos
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/-",
    "value": {
      "type": "photos",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Ember Hamster",
        "src": "http://example.com/images/productivity.png"
      }
    }
  }
]
```

### Updating Attributes <a href="#patch-updating-attributes" id="patch-updating-attributes" class="headerlink"></a>

To update an attribute, perform a `"replace"` operation with the attribute's
name specified by the `"path"`.

For instance, the following request should update just the `src` property of the
photo at `/photos/1`:

```text
PATCH /photos/1
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  { "op": "replace", "path": "/src", "value": "http://example.com/hamster.png" }
]
```

### Updating Relationships <a href="#patch-updating-relationships" id="patch-updating-relationships" class="headerlink"></a>

To update a relationship, send an appropriate Patch operation to the
relationship's URL.

A server **MAY** also support relationship updates at a higher level, such
as the resource's URL or the API's root URL. As discussed above, the request
URL and each Patch operation's `"path"` must be complementary and combine to
target a particular relationship's URL.

#### Updating To-One Relationships <a href="#patch-updating-to-one-relationships" id="patch-updating-to-one-relationships" class="headerlink"></a>

To update a to-one relationship, perform a `"replace"` operation with a URL
and `"path"` that targets the relationship. The `"value"` **MUST** be a
resource identifier object or `null`, to remove the relationship.

For instance, the following request should update the `author` of an article:

```text
PATCH /article/1/relationships/author
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  { "op": "replace", "path": "", "value": {"type": "people", "id": "1"} }
]
```

To remove a to-one relationship, perform a `replace` operation on the
relationship to change its value to `null`. For example:

```text
PATCH /article/1/relationships/author
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  { "op": "replace", "path": "", "value": null }
]
```

#### Updating To-Many Relationships <a href="#patch-updating-to-many-relationships" id="patch-updating-to-many-relationships" class="headerlink"></a>

A server **MUST** respond to Patch operations that target a *to-many
relationship URL* as described below.

For all operations, the `"value"` **MUST** contain an object that contains
an array of resource identifier objects or an empty array, to remove all
elements of the relationship.

If a client requests a `"replace"` operation to a *to-many relationship URL*, the
server **MUST** either completely replace every member of the relationship,
return an appropriate error response if some resources can not be found or
accessed, or return a `403 Forbidden` response if complete replacement is
not allowed by the server.

For example, the following request replaces every tag for an article:

```text
PATCH /photos/1/relationships/tags
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "op": "replace",
    "path": "",
    "value": [
      { "type": "tags", "id": "2" },
      { "type": "tags", "id": "3" }
    ]
  }
]
```

To add an element to a to-many relationship, request an `"add"` operation that
targets the relationship's URL. Because the operation is targeting the end of a
collection, the `"path"` must end with `"/-"`.

In the following example, the comment with ID `123` is added to the list of
comments for the article with ID `1`:

```text
PATCH /articles/1/relationships/comments
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/-",
    "value": [
      { "type": "comments", "id": "123" }
    ]
  }
]
```

To remove a to-many relationship, perform a `"remove"` operation that targets
the relationship's URL.

In the following example, comments with IDs of `5` and `13` are removed
from the list of comments for the article with ID `1`:

```text
PATCH /articles/1/relationships/comments
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "op": "remove",
    "path": "",
    "value": [
      { "type": "comments", "id": "5" },
      { "type": "comments", "id": "13" }
    ]
  }
]
```

### Deleting a Resource <a href="#patch-deleting" id="patch-deleting" class="headerlink"></a>

To delete a resource, perform a `"remove"` operation with a URL and `"path"`
that targets the resource.

For instance, photo `1` might be deleted with the following request:

```text
PATCH /photos/1
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  { "op": "remove", "path": "" }
]
```

### Responses <a href="#patch-responses" id="patch-responses" class="headerlink"></a>

#### 204 No Content <a href="#patch-responses-204" id="patch-responses-204" class="headerlink"></a>

A server **MUST** return a `204 No Content` status code in response to a
successful Patch operation in which the client's current attributes remain up to
date.

#### 200 OK <a href="#patch-responses-200" id="patch-responses-200" class="headerlink"></a>

If a server accepts an update but also changes the resource(s) in other ways
than those specified by the request (for example, updating the `updatedAt`
attribute or a computed `sha`), it **MUST** return a `200 OK` response as well
as a representation of the updated resources.

The server **MUST** specify a `Content-Type` header of `application/vnd.api+json;
ext=jsonpatch`. The body of the response **MUST** contain an array of JSON objects,
each of which **MUST** conform to the JSON API media type
(`application/vnd.api+json`). Response objects in this array **MUST** be in
sequential order and correspond to the operations in the request document.

For instance, a request may create two photos in separate operations:

```text
PATCH /photos
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch
Accept: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/-",
    "value": {
      "type": "photos",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Ember Hamster",
        "src": "http://example.com/images/productivity.png"
      }
    }
  },
  {
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/-",
    "value": {
      "type": "photos",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Mustaches on a Stick",
        "src": "http://example.com/images/mustaches.png"
      }
    }
  }
]
```

The response would then include corresponding JSON API documents contained
within an array:

```text
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/vnd.api+json; ext=jsonpatch

[
  {
    "data": [{
      "type": "photos",
      "id": "123",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Ember Hamster",
        "src": "http://example.com/images/productivity.png"
      }
    }]
  }, {
    "data": [{
      "type": "photos",
      "id": "124",
      "attributes": {
        "title": "Mustaches on a Stick",
        "src": "http://example.com/images/mustaches.png"
      }
    }]
  }
]
```

#### Errors <a href="#patch-responses-errors" id="patch-responses-errors" class="headerlink"></a>

A server **MAY** return error objects that correspond to each operation. The
body of the response **MUST** contain an array of JSON objects, which
**MUST** be in sequential order and correspond to the operations in the
request document. Each response object **SHOULD** contain only error objects
keyed by `"errors"`, since no operations can be completed successfully when
any errors occur. Error codes for each specific operation **SHOULD** be
returned in the `"status"` member of each error object.
