index.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: JSON API
---

## Description

"JSON API" is a JSON-based read/write hypermedia media type designed to support
a smart client who wishes to build a data-store of information.

{% include status.md %}

## MIME Types

- [`application/vnd.api+json`](http://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.api+json)

## Format documentation

There are two JSON API styles:

* [The ID Style](/format#id-based-json-api)
* [The URL Style](/format#url-based-json-api)

The ID style is the easiest to get started with, but requires that your
clients be able to guess the URLs for related documents. It also locks
your API into a particular URL structure, which may become a problem as
your API grows.

The URL style requires less guessing on the client side, and makes
clients more resilient to API changes, but is trickier to use with
relationships and compound documents.

In general, you should be able to start with an ID-based JSON API and
upgrade to a URL-based API, if you want more control over the precise
URLs used for a resource.

## Update history

- 2013-05-03: Initial release of the draft.
- 2013-07-22: Media type registration completed with the IANA.

You can subscribe to an RSS feed of individual changes [here](https://github.com/json-api/json-api/commits.atom).

Commit message:

Clarified some marketing.
While the previous description was correct and succinct, if you don't know what's up, it was
pretty bad. This should hopefully be better for people who aren't familliar with all the details.

index.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: JSON API
---

## Description

"JSON API" is a standard for building APIs in JSON. If you've
ever argued with your team about the way your JSON responses
should be formatted, JSON API is your anti-bikeshedding weapon.

Furthermore, clients built around JSON API are able to take
advantage of its features around efficently caching responses,
sometimes eliminating network requests entirely.

By following shared conventions, you can increase productivity,
take advantage of generalized tooling, and focus on what
matters: your application.

{% include status.md %}

## MIME Types

JSON API has been properly registered with the IANA. Its media
type designation is [`application/vnd.api+json`](http://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.api+json).

## Format documentation

To get started with JSON API, check out our documentation. There
are two styles:

* [The ID Style](/format#id-based-json-api)
* [The URL Style](/format#url-based-json-api)

The ID style is easier to get started with, and probably looks
very close to your already-existing API.

After you're more comfortable with the format, you may decide
to upgrade to the URL style. It offers extra flexibility, but
requires more intelligent client code.

We expect most users of JSON API will transition from their
totally custom API to one based on the ID style, and then later
to the URL style. This is of course not required, but if you're
not sure, it's the easiest way to get started.

## Update history

- 2013-05-03: Initial release of the draft.
- 2013-07-22: Media type registration completed with the IANA.

You can subscribe to an RSS feed of individual changes [here](https://github.com/json-api/json-api/commits.atom).
